#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: Civilization 
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename
#+LINK: pdf   pdfview:~/proj/chenla/hoard/lib/

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-w & w-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../../index.org][top]]] [[[../index.org][up]]]

* Civilization
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: 
  :Name:      /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/wip/warp/01-first/civilization.org
  :Created:   2018-11-06T16:47@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
  :ID:        adb5d67b-cdde-4db5-8bee-1b099115a980
  :VER:       594769686.224908505
  :GEO:       48P-491193-1287029-15
  :BXID:      proj:NLI3-1707
  :Class:     primer
  :Type:      work
  :Status:    wip
  :Licence:   MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
  :END:

** Scope
** TL;DR


*** nomenclature, etymology



*** civilization <-> Barbarism

Civilization as in opposition Barbarism is a conceit -- so-called
barbaric societies are rich complex systems that share pretty much all
of the traits of a civilization save, a sedantary lifestyle, man made
buildings and settlements, cultivated monoculture of domesticated
species of plants and animals.  These have always been portrayed as
being in opposition, with one being superior to the other -- but this
is a value judgement that has survived because of writing systems,
without any record of what life was like on the other side.  In fact,
civlization is, in large part, the story of the subjegation of nomadic
peoples by sedantary societies and power structures.  The Mongolian
Empire was the great exception, and proved that nomadic systems could
embody all of the so-called positive characteristics of sedantary
civilization while still being semi-nomadic.

*** singular plural

The plural and the singular

humanity is converging and becoming a single civilization.  For all
practical purposes it already is.

*** cop out -- complex societies

The rejection of the term civilization in favor of the term /complex
societies/ is not satisfactory as it reduces humanity as a whole to a
complex system -- which is what it is, but not that it is something
unique among all animal societies and is far greater than the sum of
it's parts.

As such, we will call what we are building, simply, /the culture/ as
used by Iain Banks, as both the material way of life and
infrastructure, together with the normative principles, values and
ideals of a culture.

*** the clean and well-lit prison

clash of civilization -- narrow definition of a subset of culture as
religion or ideology.

the whole clash of civilizations rubbish.

*** Techne and MÄ“tis

Material life, technology -- settlements, buildings, agriculture,
writing, mathematics, tools, economic and social structures.

*** Culture

way of life, normative principles, values and ideals.

*** Mankind

Originally collective homo sapiens, Sapians -- if we broaden our scope
and context we should include all of Man which includes all of our
fellow subspecies of Man.  This is important because the concept of
Man is more inclusive, that encompasses what we are and what we will
become.

Our nature, our imperitive is to extend and externalize our mind,
memory and muscle.  Because of that we must include other species
other than our fellow Men to include domesticated species who are part
of us, dog, cat, chicken, horse, pig, cow.  The list is short.


*** Usage

Our usage in W&W will be:

  - Civilizations : usage before 1900 when there were multiple
    civilizations.  Each had it's own sustainible material and
    economic system, each had their own culture.  There were multiple
    such systems and if one collapsed the others absorbed or rebooted
    what was left.

  - Civilization : usage of a single global civilization

  - The Culture : what we're building.  We set it apart because it is
    different from what came before -- 


** The Merge


The thing is, that civilization has scaled far larger than it should
have.  And we have been kicking out the supports, all of the negative
feedback loops that have kept things running, from tipping into a
runnaway postive feedback loop.

Civilization was built on nomadic social structures that evolved from
life on the Savannah.  But neither is what is commonly thought.
Humans have always been territorial -- we learn to adapt to a
territory and if there isn't a good reason, we stay there.  But these
were territories we moved around in, the city had it's roots in cyclic
seasonal ad hoc gatherings.  We came together, we played house for a
day, a week, a month or so and then disbanded.  We found that we could
gather and cooperate in large numbers for relatively short periods of
time.  We built stuff, monuments, shelters and other trappings that
eventually became the hallmark of what we think of as civilizations
today.  But, like madi gras, or the modern Olympics, SXSW, Ramadan,
Woodstock or burning man we did our thing and then scattered until the
next time.

The temporary very temporary nature of such transitory cities was a
feature not a bug.  We found that we could scale human cooperation
beyond the the size of the band, or tribe.  We got better at these
gatherings.  Language evolved to make ever more complex cooperation
possible.  A highly clement Holocene made possible to create surpluses
that gave us breathing room, spare time to think, to innovate.  It's
no surprise that what became civilization started in highly hospitable
climates.  The Indus Valley, the SE Asian Savannahs, the
Mediterranean.  These were literal Edens where Man flourished and had
the free time to make ever more ways of making even more free time.

Eventually we hit a tipping point and we got cocky and some of us
stopped disbanding and began the first all-year settlements.

once we stayed put, we needed every increasingly complex social
hierarchies to compensate for the fact that these social constructs
were beyond human scale and couldn't be sustained without... giving up
egalitarian social structures -- it's a short hop from here to slavery

slavery, which is still the bedrock of civilization, which has morphed
from simple forms of physical force to today's industrial employment
-- same thing, just more flexible and without all of the messy bits of
slaves running away or starting rebellions.

Toffler's hierarchy of power -- force -> valuable exchange goods ->
paper money --> bank cheques --> plastic --> online accounts is
mirrored in human servitude -- physical slavery --> feudalism -->
industrial employment --> 


 ----- we eventually bring Havelock in -- he gives us the transition
 from the oral to the written, from cognitive extension to cognitive
 externalization.

 
** 

civilization is not human -- it is an organism that belongs to a scale
that we can not understand -- that exists as a creature that has it's
own agenda -- it uses us as agents to do achieve it's aims.  We are
are but cells in a larger organism.  But the thing about cells, is
that if we band together enough of us, we can force the larger
organism we are part of to change.  Civilization is an organism that
is made up of monads which are capable of abstract thought.  Take
enough sentient creatures and indeed you get a Borg -- a hive mind
that have a rudimentary sentience.  It's a manifest complexity that is
beyond us, but at the same time is at least potentially
understandable, as least in hindsight after a great deal of collective
effort.

we need to think in terms that we are a virus that will, over time
take over the beast and change its direction.

in the world that civilization has created that has smashed our
clement holcene and replaced it with an anthropocene that will result
in a new Cretaceous...

we new more robust smash-proof structures -- we need to move away from
the centralized controlled and /owned/ by an elite to the distributed
and federated 

We need to re-introduce social structures that pre-dated civilization
-- distributed, federated, ad hoc and egalitarian human-scale
structures and systems.  This is the only way we can survive the
coming New Cretaceous we have collectively triggered.  It is the only
way to transcend the social monstrocities of slavery, greed, fear,
alienation that we errected in order to scale beyond our own human
scale. Dante got it right, though he never would have recognized it.
We really did fuck up a good thing -- Eden -- and it was knowledge
that was responsible.  But what we got wrong was that knowledge was
sin.  That was the lie that the elite sold us to keep control -- it
was always one of us, in guise of a snake,  that led us astray.

But now we have traveled down through the ever more horrific levels of
a hell we have created and now have the potential, to crawl out
through the asshole of our own making -- not back into paradise, but
into purgatory where we are told to wait.  But waiting rooms are an
insidious kind of torment.  It doesn't wash, just another lie we tell
ourselves.  Purgatory is a world between worlds, it is what we make of
it.  Not what an elite tell us, not the strings that our genome so
ever slowly pull us this way and that as puppets.  We will soon have
control over that.  Purgatory is between the two extremes, and waiting
is just a journey between two extremes which we really don't want to
reach, we've seen both paradise and the inferno are both
punishments. Dante got that, all the cool kids are in purgatory.

Paradise is the bliss of ignorance, it's the needle, that promise that
sledgehammer that heroin smacks you with in the skull when you
mainline that very first and only that very first time drawn out into
eternity.  Hell is just the second time you do it, knowing you'll
forever be denied the paradise of that first hit.  Those are the false
options we've been presented with for millennia.  None of this is new,
we only choose to think it is.

Monothesism was always about scaling control.  The one centralized God
that replaced the many local distributed gods of the wood, rock and
stream, of earth and fire and water, wind and sky -- the gods of
mÄ“tis, of home and hearth, of ancestors and memory.  These are the
gods who live among us, who know and deeply care about us, if only we
care enough to care about them.

Let's leave them both, paradise and inferno as horizons that we can
never reach.  Like a dog chasing a car, we wouldn't know what to do
with if we caught it, and what's more would just fuck it up if we did.
Humanity, scratch that, a broader more inclusive concept of the
potential of what Mankind could be, needs to work out a middle ground
we can inhabit, live and thrive in, and just keep on going, leaving
the horror of /any/ destination always somewhere beyond an ever
receeding horzon.




** References


