#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: Eudaimon Introduction
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename
#+LINK: pdf   pdfview:~/proj/chenla/hoard/lib/

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-w & w-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../../index.org][top]]] [[[../index.org][up]]]

* Eudaimon Introduction
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: 
  :Name:      /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/wip/warp/02-eduaimon/intro.org
  :Created:   2018-10-22T11:31@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
  :ID:        2b5c8dc9-684a-436c-9397-9f55fa6753af
  :VER:       593454732.286231287
  :GEO:       48P-491193-1287029-15
  :BXID:      proj:YWS7-3820
  :Class:     primer
  :Type:      work
  :Status:    wip
  :Licence:   MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
  :END:

    "Eudaimonia depends on all the things that would make
    us happy if we knew of their existence, but quite
    independently of whether we do know about them.
    â€” Wikipedia"

The Greeks tie eudaimon to virtues which are /states of the soul/ and
each Greek school of philosophy, the platonists, stoics and epicurians
quibble about how one goes about living a virtuous life.  This was
the original job of philosophy -- to make sense of how the world works
(which become natural philosophy) which became science, and how one
goes about living eudaimon (a good a virtuous life).

I don't want to weigh in on the how here so much as what are the
practical preconditions in terms Maslow's hierarchy that must be in
place in order for anyone to be able to think in terms of happiness
and virtue.  It should be noted that we will be only exploring secular
humanistic solutions which do not require a supernatural lawgiver.
This does not mean that one excludes the other but there will always
be a subset of quirky divine laws that are throwbacks from a different
age which are left over and don't make any sense today which will be
incompatible with some religious legal frameworks, in particular
dietary and dress restrictions that can be can be observed by
individuals who proscribed to such belief systems but can not be
universally imposed on others.

This will provide us with a baseline.

We can then go on to define what constitutes freedom in a
hyper-connected technological industrial civilization.  This gives us
the boundries and trade-offs that we must accept.

Finally we can briefly explore the range of obligations and rights of
persons living in such a society.  Many rights come with strings in
that they must be reciprocal and therefore limit the freedom of both
parties.  Freedom is directly proportionate to the size of its
audience -- this is largely because of edge cases, and the more edge
cases you need to specifically cater too the more restrictive things
get for the entire group.  It's also true that greater the need to
make exceptions for edge cases, the less tolerent the collective body
tends to be.  The Golden Rule works very well as is, unless someone in
the group believes that there are exceptions and that it doesn't apply
to everyone.  The more a community is fragmented the more rules are
needed to keep the peace between the different factions.





** References


